E. THE COMPUTED FEATURES

1) COMPUTED PARTICULAR WINDOW ENTROPY (CPWE)
This feature refers to the entropy of a 32-packet window.
To extract this feature, we created a function called DstIpCollect.py in Python and added it to the controller. This function collects destination IP addresses in a 32-packet window.
Every new packet received by the controller was stored in an
VOLUME 11, 2023 28943
W. I. Khedr et al.: FMDADM: A Multi-Layer DDoS Attack Detection and Mitigation Framework
array table. The entropy of the window was calculated when
the array (packet_count) reached 32. The window entropy
was computed under both normal and attack conditions.

2) COMPUTED PACKET RATE FEATURE (CPRF)
Packet rate is an extracted feature that indicates the number
of data packets sent per second. The packet rate feature is
calculated by dividing the packet per flow by the monitoring
interval. The Packet per flow (PPF) is another computed
feature that measures the total number of packets in a single
flow at any given time. The packet rate feature is calculated

where FPCount represents the total number of packets in a
single flow, T represents the time frame used to compute the
packets per flow and MInt is the monitoring interval.

3) RECEIVED FLOW PACKETS STANDARD DEVIATION
(RFPSD)
The packet per flow (PPF) feature is a calculated feature that
equals the packet count (number of packets) for a single flow.
The standard deviation of the packets per flow was proposed
as a computed feature. This parameter is highly correlated
with the likelihood of DDoS. An attacker broadcasts many
small packets. This metric will be significantly decreased
because these packets will have a far smaller standard deviation than the normal data packets. The RFPSD feature in (5)

where f represents the number of live flows, n represents the
number of packets in each live flow at a given time, and AvgP
represents the average number of packets across all the flows
over a specified time.

4) RECEIVED FLOW BYTES STANDARD DEVIATION (RFBSD)
The byte per flow feature is a calculated feature that refers to
the number of bytes transferred into a single flow. Similar to
RFPSD, this metric has a significant link with the frequency
of DDoS attacks, and its predicted value is smaller under
attack conditions than that under regular traffic conditions.

where f represents the number of live flows, n represents the
number of packets in each live flow at a given time, and AvgB
is the average number of bytes across all the flows over a
specified time.

5) COMPUTED FLOW ENTRY RATE (CFER)
The flow entry rate (FER) is defined as the total number of
flows that enter the OpenFlow switch during a given monitoring interval. When a DDoS attack occurs, the number of
flow entries rapidly increases for a certain amount of time.
Consequently, this feature is crucial in identifying DDoS
attacks. The CFER feature in (7) is the computed FER for
a 32-packet window size, and is computed as follows:

where FCount represents the total number of flows during a
given time and MInt is the monitoring interval.